--- page 1 ---
sustainability
Article
The Paradox of Informal Settlements Revealed in an
ATLAS of Informality: Findings from Mapping
Growth in the Most Common Yet Unmapped Forms
of Urbanization
Jota Samper1,*
, Jennifer A. Shelby2and Dean Behary3
1Program in Environmental Design, Faculty of Planning and Urban Design, University of Colorado,
Boulder, CO 80309, USA
2Community Engagement Design and Research Center, Researcher, University of Colorado,
Boulder, CO 80309, USA; Jennifer.Shelby@colorado.edu
3Program in Environmental Design, Undergraduate Research Assistant, University of Colorado,
Boulder, CO 80309, USA; dean.behary@colorado.edu
*Correspondence: jota@colorado.edu; Tel.: +1-303-492-2801
Received: 30 July 2020; Accepted: 13 November 2020; Published: 15 November 2020
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: Informal settlements are the most common form of urbanization on the planet, accounting
for one-third of the total urban form. It is expected that by the mid twenty-ﬁrst century, up to three
billion people will live in informal urban environments. However, we lack a consistent mapping
method to pinpoint where that informality is located or how it expands. This paper presents the
ﬁndings from a collection of standardized measurements of 260 informal settlements across the world.
The main research goal is to identify a standard global sample of informal neighborhoods. It then
focuses on mapping urban growth with remote sensing and direct mapping tools. The third stage
classiﬁes settlements based on how adjacency features such as development, topography, or bodies of
water relate to their growth. The survey of growth corroborates the idea of informality as expanding
geography, although at di erent rates than previously cited in the literature. We found peri-urban
location to be a suitable estimator of informal settlement growth. This ﬁnding validates the comparison
of multiple settlements to understand rates of change of urban informality worldwide. The ﬁndings
here are vital to resolve important questions about the role of informal urban development in the
context of accelerated global population growth.
Keywords: informal settlements; slums; mapping; urban policy; GIS; urban growth;
urban land management
1. Introduction
Despite a reported decrease in the relative proportion of the population living in informal
settlements between 2000 and 2014 (from 28 percent to 23 percent), “the absolute number of urban
residents who live in slums continued to grow” [ 1,2]. Surprisingly, despite the scale of the phenomena
of informality, we lack a comprehensive database that presents these cases globally. Scholars typically
map informal urban development at two scales, the national and the neighborhood scale. At the
national level, based on data collected by states or international agencies, these entities use domestic
indexes to compare change across regions [ 3–5]. However, these valuable index focused studies have
concentrated on regional or national measures creating little reliability at the city scale. The second
group of studies focuses on single case studies at the neighborhood scale [ 6,7]. While these exercises
present astonishing detail, the single case selection presents problems of generalization of ﬁndings.
Sustainability 2020 ,12, 9510; doi:10.3390 /su12229510 www.mdpi.com /journal /sustainability
--- page 2 ---
Sustainability 2020 ,12, 9510 2 of 25
These two scales of measurement create blindness of informality at an urban scale and its relationship
with global trends. Today, technological advances in mapping using remote sensing and scholarly
work to develop tools to identify informal settlements unique morphology open the opportunity to
breach that gap by accessing both the city and global scale simultaneously. The Atlas of Informality
(AoI) is an attempt to broaden understanding of such overlooked phenomena by creating a dataset
that directly maps informal settlements at the neighborhood scale over time. The primary goal of this
research is, ﬁrst, to create a database that breaches the data gap between measurements of informality
at the national level and those single cases at the local scale for neighborhood comparison of informal
settlements across geographies. The second is to critically answer, how do such geographies of
informality expand globally?
This research uses an inclusive deﬁnition of informal settlement, incorporating into the global
database all cases designated as informal settlements in any of its diverse interpretations to include the
broad spectrum of informal settlement urban forms. A deﬁning characteristic of informal settlements
as an urban form is their constant state of change due to the piecemeal additive construction process.
This persistent state of change complicates the study of these urban forms. However, it is necessary
to study the variation of settlements’ change over time to further understand their urban processes.
This research collects standardized measurements of 260 informal settlements to provide a tool to
geolocate, at the neighborhood scale, each one of these places. It then focuses on the mapping of urban
growth. For the mapping of informal settlements, the AoI uses a combination of remote sensing and
direct mapping with readily available satellite photography. We use manual digitization from ﬁfteen
years of high-resolution satellite data to construct all cases for this project. The direct mapping measure
is a more labor-intensive process as compared to automatic mapping methods but provides more
accurate and standardized data because of human ability to recognize and interpret nuanced variations
in form at a level technology cannot yet accomplish. It requires more human labor hours per element
to develop as the mapping sample increases in size as opposed to automatic mapping methods that
increase in e ciency as the sample size grows.
The survey of growth corroborates the idea of informality as expanding geography. The cases
selected represent some of the most evident in the literature. In the AoI sample, all cases are older than
twenty years, and a majority are much older than that. New settlements account for less than 5% of the
sample. In the mapping of growth of informal areas, the expectation is that old cases will reach a point
of consolidation and stop growing [8].
Our ﬁndings from measuring informal areas at the neighborhood scale contradict current data
on informal settlements that show a deceleration in the rate of growth of such places. The United
Nations in their recent Sustainable Development Goals Report states that “The proportion of the urban
population living in slums worldwide declined by 20 percent between 2000 and 2014 (from 28 percent
to 23 percent)” [ 2]. The discrepancies presented here are crucial to clarifying global measures of the
scale and type of change occurring within informal settlements since these measures guide global
urban policy. This paper is divided into the following sections; ﬁrst, there is a discussion about the need
for standardized measures of informality at the neighborhood scale with global sampling. A survey
of the informal settlement deﬁnitions within the context of the literature follows. With the mapping
of the current research, we o er a reﬁned deﬁnition of informal settlement. We then focus on the
methodological approach to measure samples across the world. Finally, we present the ﬁndings of the
project, ending with the implications of such results in the context of global policy and scholarship.
2. Measuring Informal Settlements
Recurrent questions that emerge when studying informal settlements are: What is the dimension
of the informal urban form phenomena? What quantity and proportion of the population live in
such conditions? What interventions can be enacted? To answer such questions, methodologically,
scholars [ 3–6,9,10] base their claims on the extent of informality and informal urban development at
two scales. The ﬁrst is at the national scale, based on the data collected by nations or international
--- page 3 ---
Sustainability 2020 ,12, 9510 3 of 25
agencies—organizations such as the World Bank and UN-Habitat are stewards of such data—the other
scale of research focuses on case studies at the city /neighborhood scale.
The national scale data are valuable to inform policy and to set strategic goals such as the
Millennium Goals (MG) of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). However, this data, as presented
in the State of World Cities report by the UN-Habitat [ 11] or the World Development Indicators [ 12],
are compiled with estimates and not actual measurements. Furthermore, such entities measure informal
settlements and development using national indexes, which can be compared across regions since they
focus on the national scale; however, this method lacks detail at the urban scale. To date, work that
evaluates the global scale of urban informal settlements, or slums, as they are commonly known, [ 4,5]
is based on such data. These national indexes are necessary to evaluate the evolution of informal
settlements and overall development in regions. There are great examples of scholarly work using
national indexes that concentrate on the role of informal settlements in the process of urbanization
in Latin America [ 3]. They focus on these indexes to tell the story of the region. While these studies
capture the spirit of their data, they still have little reliability at the city scale. The shortcomings of the
data on which this group of research is based are the result of the complexity of mapping informal
settlements. Most developing nations do not have the technical capacity, or the resources, to map
informal areas in detail, and even when the capability exists, some governments regulations forbid or
impede the mapping, recording, or sharing of public data of such populations [ 13–15]. Limitations on
resources, or regulatory approaches in some cases, leave empty spaces where informal settlements exist
on maps [ 16]. In this way, entire neighborhoods are kept invisible and outside of o cial documents
sometimes in deliberate ways [ 17]. However, many other variables also contribute to concealing or
revealing informal settlements, such as their relationship to topography and urban morphology [ 18].
Visibility, recognition, and classiﬁcation of informal settlement are crucial for communities to access to
secure tenure [19].
The second scale of research of informal settlements focuses on case studies at the neighborhood
scale. Examples of best practices are citywide horizontal studies of multiple favelas in Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil [ 6], Medellin, and Colombia [ 8], and the work of activist architects in Caracas on the history
of informal urban form [ 7]. While these exercises present fabulous detail, the single case selection
presents traditional problems of generalization of ﬁndings inherent with this case study methodology.
Methods of measurement di er substantially from city to city. Even within cities, informal settlement
deﬁnitions may vary, depending on the year the measurements were performed [ 20]. These two
scales of measurement (nation and neighborhood) create blindness on the urban scale of the informal
urban condition and of its relationship with global trends. We are missing a means to bridge the gap
between these two e orts to better capture the elusive physical conditions of the global poor and to
better identify population and landscape vulnerabilities. The AoI becomes a valuable tool to add
dimension to our understanding of the change and development of informal settlements. However,
ﬁrst, before mapping, it is crucial to deﬁne an informal settlement clearly.
2.1. Towards an Inclusive Deﬁnition of Informal Settlements
Among the obstacles to comparative work on informal settlements is the epistemological
complexity of deﬁning what constitutes an informal settlement. Di erent organizations, national and
municipal government agencies, and scholars disagree on which variables are determinant of an
informal settlement [ 21]. Deﬁning informal settlements is a complicated endeavor; the literature on
informal settlements, both current and historic, spends a signiﬁcant amount of time attempting to
determine the limits between what is formal and informal [22–26]. Authors call attention to the need
for more speciﬁcity in the way the phenomena of informal settlements are deﬁned and classiﬁed [ 27].
International agencies ﬁnd it challenging to assess indicators of informal settlements, as currently
deﬁned, and examples of such problems can be found in the Sustainable Development Goals [ 1,28].
No consistency of evaluative variables exists between di erent countries or cities [ 29]. At meta-level,
informal settlements are the most common process of city-making. Some authors agree that “urban
--- page 4 ---
Sustainability 2020 ,12, 9510 4 of 25
informality is hence conceived as a negotiation process through which spatial value is produced” [ 30].
However, characterization is still an elusive subject because the deﬁnition of informal settlements
can have social, economic, or political implications. Each deﬁnition of informal settlements has its
limitations. For the purpose of exposing the various forms of informal settlements globally, we argue
that the more speciﬁc the deﬁnition is, the less we can know about the phenomena at a global scale.
We take this stance with the understanding that the more open the description is, the higher level of
variability is introduced into the sample, and thus less comparability can be found. Even at the city
scale, we can ﬁnd variations in determining what is considered informal. A previous study pointed out
that “in Rio de Janeiro, what deﬁnes a favela changes over the years and depends on the state initiative
at the time” [ 10]. In Medellin, areas marked as informal by city o cials in the 70s are not recognized as
such by the same city department in the next decade, even without any upgrading happening [10].
On a global scale, the deﬁnition problems start with the multitude of names used to label informal
settlements; each country in the world has a di erent word to deﬁne what an informal settlement is.
Nor do scholars agree on a precise deﬁnition of informal settlement. Some authors deﬁne informal
settlements, for example, as the predominant characteristic of the urban form of African cities [ 31].
However, informal settlement as urban phenomena can exist in every continent. A non-contested
deﬁning feature is that a “slum” is a group of buildings and not a single one [ 32], and a mainly urban
phenomenon even if rural areas have deﬁcient housing conditions that could be labeled as informal.
The most common description of informal settlements portrays them as areas where there is a lack
of basic infrastructure, poor housing, illegal dwelling, non-secure tenure, high urban density, lack of
sanitation, poverty, and exclusion [ 33]. The United Nations deﬁnes “slums” with qualitative measures,
such as the lack of durable housing [ 34]. Informal settlements in literature are traditionally presented
as the other side of the coin from the formal. Therefore, they are deﬁned by the lack of features
present in the formal city. In this tension between the formal and the informal, the settlements can be
established as places lacking access to those faculties of the formal city such as access to safe water,
access to improved sanitation, durable structures, su cient living area (overcrowding), and access to
secure tenure [ 35]. We recognize these remain vague characterizations of the complexity that informal
settlements embody. Yet, in studying the phenomena, we start from the current state of knowledge,
in its many forms, and contribute new insights to reﬁne our understanding of informal settlements.
Table 1 presents several variables applied as deﬁning characteristics of informal settlements
across multiple scholars and institutions [ 10,23,32–34,36–44]. The table presents intersections and
contradictions within the multiple deﬁnitions of informal settlements. It reveals the challenges of
choosing one deﬁnition over another. Depending on the agency, government, or scholar that is looking
at the phenomenon, an informal settlement can be classiﬁed in many ways. Adding or subtracting
variables would inevitably delete or add places. Scholars argue about the di culties of creating
generalizations of the informal settlements phenomenon because of the lack of data across continents.
Taubenböck and Kra argue that “a systematic approach to measuring morphological characteristics
of slums in di erent cities across the world beyond test cases is still absent” [ 41]. For this study,
which engages a global morphological approach to map informal settlements, the ultimate goal
is to create a database that permits evaluation across multiple cases to build theory through cross
case comparison.
--- page 5 ---
Sustainability 2020 ,12, 9510 5 of 25
Table 1. Informal settlements multiple deﬁnitions by authors from 1982 to 2019 [10,23,32–34,36–44].
Variables /Literature
A. Gilbert & Gugler, 1982
Singh & Kumra, 1986
OECD 1997
Kibwana, 2000
Oxford 2000
UN-Habitat 2006
Hurskainen & Pellikka 2004
Werthmann & Beardsleu 2008
Fernandez 2011
Samper 2014
Taubenbock H. 2014
Mukhija 2014
UN-Habitat, 2016
Patel et. al. 2019
Lack of safe water x x x x x x
lack of sanitation x x x x x x
Lack of basic infrastructure and services x x x x
Overcrowding x x
Fragile structures x x x x
Non-secure tenure x x x x x x x x x x
Group of buildings x x x x
Poverty x x x
Lak of quality of housing x
Illegal dwelling x x x
Self-Build x x
Unplanned settlements x x x
No building regulations compliance x x x x
Temporary shelters x
Develop irregularly x x
Developed progressively x x
insucient living space x x
Exclusion x x
The goal of the Atlas of Informality (AoI) is to create a globally representative database for
informal settlements and a methodology from the sample categories that can be used across the globe.
This research then seeks to use an inclusive deﬁnition of what an informal settlement is. The AoI
database incorporates any case designated by a scholar, practitioner, publication, or community as
an informal settlement in any of their multiple deﬁnitions and names. We selected this overarching
way to determine what an informal settlement is and to provide a tool to incorporate the broad
spectrum of informal settlements as an urban form globally in the e ort to create a consistent and
inclusive mapping.
2.2. Mapping Informal Neighborhoods Globally
Despite initiatives to diminish the prominence of informal settlements as an urban reality [ 45], on a
global scale, it is estimated that the number of informal settlements continues to grow. According to
the United Nations Economic and Social Council’s evaluation of the progress of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), “despite some gains, the absolute number of urban residents who live in
slums continued to grow, owing in part to accelerating urbanization, population growth, and lack of
appropriate land and housing policies” [ 1]. While percentages have diminished over the last 14 years
by approximately 9% [ 45], the total number of world slum dwellers has increased by 11.11% in the
same period, some estimating the increase as high as 28% [ 46]. The World Bank assessment shows
a dramatic reduction in slums per region over recent decades, from 35% in 1990 to 20% in 2014 in
Latin America and the Caribbean; from 67 to 55% in South Saharan Africa; from 57 to 31% in South
Asia; and 47 to 26% in East Asia and the Paciﬁc in the same period; and from 39 to 28% in the Middle
East and North Africa in 1990–2005 [ 47]. However, this macro-level analysis seems to hide within the
deﬁnition of “slum” the real percentage of change of such spaces.
Existing data about informal settlements are not available, accurate, or complete and, in most cases,
obsolete [ 48]. The mapping of cadastral areas in informal settlements is crucial for the transformation
of these areas [ 49]. Imprecise data about the scale of informal settlements hinder agencies, city o cials,
and scholars’ e orts to inform appropriate policies about the phenomena of informality. The UN-Habitat
highlights a lack of data at the sub-city level [ 50] as one of the challenges in dealing with urban poverty
globally. The question then is: what is the best way to solve this vacuum of information? The AoI
response to this problem lies in the intersection of these methods. The main goal is to systematically
--- page 6 ---
Sustainability 2020 ,12, 9510 6 of 25
collect data at the same resolution level and over the same period, to apply when possible remote
sensing tools but using manual input so it can bypass today’s technological bottleneck.
The mapping of informal settlements can be divided into ﬁve methodologies: community mapping,
single case selection, national indexes, remote sensing, and urban morphologies. Each one of these
methods has its virtues and challenges. Community mapping is born out of the vacuum of information
and the need for communities to create data to make the needs of their neighborhoods visible.
Since state agencies fail to map or abstain from mapping informal settlements’ living conditions,
among the most e ective systems to gather reliable data is self-mapping by communities [51–53] .
This self-mapping produces a precise level of detail of living conditions. Along with the mapping data,
the community beneﬁts from the empowerment that emanates out of community self-identiﬁcation.
However, this happens haphazardly in a neighborhood or, in a few cases, a citywide scale,
without consistency across communities. The generalization of community mapping is limited since
most maps reﬂect local needs. The isolation of communities also contributes to the accessibility of the
information for groups or individuals not related to these mapping exercises. Another methodology of
mapping is single case selection; these are the mappings by scholars, NGOs, and municipalities that
focus on the neighborhood or city as a case [ 10,54,55]. Here, the output is more detailed, as new aerial
photography and remote sensing data make the creation of highly detailed maps of neighborhoods
possible. Unique case mapping allows bypassing state regulations since non-state agencies can perform
them. A disadvantage that this project exposes is the challenge of generalizability of the single cases.
National indexes lend themselves to generalization; these mappings draw on the capacity of nations
to collect demographic data based on variables of census tracts that then get compared at a global
scale. The data collected at this scale are the data of the international agencies such as the World
Bank, United Nations /UN-Habitat, and the International Development Bank. However, the broad
nature of national indexes is characterized by low-resolution data at the urban scale. National indexes
data such as census undergo a ﬁltering process to protect individuals and populations, and these
data separate the information from the geographic location of communities to levels that make
it dicult to relate this information to informal settlements at the neighborhood scale. However,
most of the scholarly understanding of the informal world at a global scale comes out of this type
of data [ 4,5]. Remote sensing (RS) technologies bridge the gap between comparability and the level
of detail necessary to create global analyses [ 41,48]. The use of high-resolution satellite data permits
researchers to visit multiple sites and apply variables to analyze the qualities of urban form [ 56–59].
The use of algorithms applied to this data, such as object-oriented, radial casting, and contour
model (snakes), permits extraction and recognition of unique features of the landscape [ 48,57–61].
These mapping projects use these algorithms alongside remote sensing imagery to collect, identify,
and map informal settlements. GIS literature in remote sensing focuses on how to train algorithms to
determine the location of informal settlements [ 62,63]. The RS method helps identify any unknown
settlements, particularly when there is not su cient information about the locations of these settlements.
However, old consolidated settlements or settlements with regular urban patterns are di cult to
pinpoint with such an approach. RS mapping is perhaps the most promising upcoming technology.
Today, there is an emergence of RS-based studies focused on exploring the morphological features of
informal settlements to identify informal settlements, much development has occurred in the automatic
classiﬁcation of locations from optical resources [ 60,63–65], and other methods such as the use of
radar have also shown promise and success [ 66,67]. RS automated methods have also demonstrated
validity in the feature detection in landscape archaeology [ 68,69] and detection of anthropogenic
geomorphology [ 70]. And the use to identify environmental risk in traditional unmapped areas
such as in archeology [ 71,72]. Spatial-contextual information can also be incorporated through
Object Based Image Analysis (OBIA), which is also currently the most common strategy for the
classiﬁcation of informal settlement areas [ 63,73]. The use of Very High Resolution (VHR) with the
help of the Level Co-occurrence Matrix (GLCM) has permitted the extraction of informal settlement
areas [ 74]. However, this method still has limitations. So, new capabilities have helped automatize
--- page 7 ---
Sustainability 2020 ,12, 9510 7 of 25
the classiﬁcation from machine-learning (ML) [ 75,76] to computer vision using convolutional neural
networks (CNNs); this approach has demonstrated higher accuracy for detecting informal settlements
from VHR images [ 77]. Local directional pattern (LDP) has also provided advances over the traditional
gray level co-occurrence matrix (GLCM) [ 78]; a challenge in VHR arises in the limitation of up-to-date
thematic maps of informal areas for which the use of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) has served as
a tool to breach the time gap but increase the work at the ground level [ 79]. After all advances in RS
automatization, manual delineation still o ers advantages over automatic classiﬁcation achieving an
overall accuracy of 80.5% when compared to manual delineation [ 80]. At the rate of growth of the quality
of imagery available and the perfecting of RS methodologies in the future, mapping of any urban form
would be a wholly automatic endeavor. However, even as this promise exists, at present, there is still
no global mapping of informal settlements or a systematic inventory of its morphologic types across the
globe [ 81]. Finally, Urban Morphology (UM)—the morphology of the built environment, in particular
that of the informal settlements, shares unique characteristic patterns across settlements: scale, size,
shape, and distribution [ 82]. Texture measures can be potentially used to represent the contrast between
planned and unplanned settlements [ 83]. Analyzing the urban environment’s physical features such as
green space, structure of layout, density of built-up areas, and size of buildings can help to identify
heterogeneity in urban areas that helps in the determination of sub-standard residential areas (informal
settlements) [ 84]. The self-built process in which informal settlements are created tends to follow
particular morphological processes [ 85], which can be analyzed using methods such as space syntax [ 86].
Interest in the urban form of informal settlements developed in an emerging body of knowledge on
the morphologies and morphogenesis of informal settlements [ 8,82,87–90]. An emerging body of work
focuses on exploring the change in the morphology of informal settlements [ 39,55,85]. Variation over
time in the extent of informal areas presents challenges for planning and city management [ 91].
A second e ort of the AoI database is to investigate the variable of time—in particular, how the land
surface occupied by informal settlements varies with time. If one of the deﬁning features of informality
is their ever-changing nature, what does that change represent on a global scale? Focusing on areas
instead of population percentage estimations can provide a more empirical approach to understanding
the changing rates of informal settlements globally. It can also direct the establishment of guidelines
for urban policy and adaptive capacity.
2.3. A Methodological Approach to Map and Measuring Informal Settlements
Mapping informal settlements is a complicated endeavor, new tools have provided ways to
do so. However, there is still some level of imprecision that stems from the non-uniform nature of
informality globally [ 81]. How can the nature of growth be captured in these places, and how can
the data be collected from such di erent environments? Currently, digital mapping and new sensing
technology have created new opportunities to map informal settlements using remote tools while
reducing the gap of traditional studies, allowing mapping of cities and particular urban forms of
informal settlements using the same methodology that opens the opportunity for comparability [ 41,63].
However, new sensing technology is limited in its capacity to di erentiate informal settlements from
formal city spaces. For this project, we took a di erent approach: we developed an inclusive deﬁnition
of informal settlements then selected a few signiﬁcant cases per city /country as examples of informality
in that place. By inclusive deﬁnition of informality, we mean that we chose a process that permits
capturing an informal neighborhood in any of its deﬁnitions. In this research, we ﬁrst included
neighborhoods already designated as an informal settlement by a state, city, community, or scholar;
we looked for geographic locations and also for mapped areas with deﬁned settlement boundaries;
in addition, we used morphological features of those places such as homogeneous scale and texture
of constructions to further determine settlement boundaries. Although imperfect, we chose this
method because it permitted us to capture the various ways in which the phenomenon of informality
is presented around the world.
--- page 8 ---
Sustainability 2020 ,12, 9510 8 of 25
For the mapping process, we followed a ﬁve-step approach: (1) crowdsourcing of cases, followed by
(2) the creation of a mapping protocol, distributed across a similar number of undergraduate
environmental design students—one case per student for (3) the application of the mapping protocol
with direct mapping. (4) A curation of data followed that included a peer-review process examining
completeness and validating the correctness of measurement for each case. This ensured each case
complied with the standard of the Atlas. Finally, (5) data compiled with the mapping using Google
Earth Pro (GEP) was transferred to Arc-GIS for analysis.
Crowdsourcing of cases: Informal settlements are neighborhoods; we chose this as the unit of
analysis. The project endeavored to capture the phenomenon in its various global forms. We aspired to
capture a balanced number of cases per city and country, aiming to reach most countries where informal
settlements are present. For the initial selection of cases to the AoI, a crowdsourcing process was used to
obtain the ﬁrst set of examples. The idea was to start with the most known cases, those included in the
informal settlement literature, those known as the exemplary cases in each city, and those that scholars
have already identiﬁed through each one of the multiple deﬁnitions of informal settlements. We invited
scholars of informal settlements to collaborate on the creation of the ﬁrst list. Additionally, a literature
review and web search produced a total of 405 cases. The main objective of the informal settlement
selection was to cover most of the world’s countries and cities using one or a few representative cases
per city.
To ﬁnd and corroborate the classiﬁcation of settlements as informal, a Google Scholar search was
performed using keywords such as the name of country or city and the words slum and informal
settlement, and any local term used to identify an informal settlement in that geographic area,
such as Tugurios, Favelas, Bidonvilles, Chabolas, Pueblos Nuevos, Coreas, Barracas, Kampung, Morros,
Ashwa’iyya, Squatters, or Shanty Towns. As the sample grew, priority was given to places (nation /cities)
not already covered in the selection. For vacuums in the literature, we used a Google search engine
entering the same keywords in popular media (local and national news organizations), state reports
(local and national), and organization reports (such UN-Habitat, World Bank, IDB). We intentionally
avoided over-representation of places with robust informal settlement mapping already in place.
For example, there is vast information about informal settlements in Latin America; Rio de Janeiro in
Brazil has ample GIS shapeﬁles that map the boundaries of each one of its 1040 favelas [20].
Complete and accurate mapping of informal settlements is di cult since these special urban forms
are constantly changing. As a result, ﬁnding comprehensively mapped places is uncommon. However,
there are several cases that demonstrate that it is possible. Samper’s historical research of informality in
Medellin presents a compilation of maps identifying informal settlements created by the Departamento
Administrativo de Planeaci ón (planning department) of the city of Medellin from 1957 to 2014 [ 10].
The Instituto Municipal de Urbanismo Pereira Passos (IPP) In Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, maintains a
database with mappings from 1999 to the present that includes favela limits, updated regularly by the
Sistema de Informaç ões Urbanas (SIURB) of the mayor o ce (Prefeitura da Cidade do Rio de Janeiro)
free to access online [ 92] The city of Bogota maintains a record of asentamientos humanos (Informal
Settlements) accessible at the open access data page of the Colombian Government [ 93] and updated
as part of their city master plan (Plan de Ordenamiento Territorial POT). The organization Techo has a
database of open access of Asentamientos (Informal Settlements) for countries such as Chile, Argentina,
Colombia, and Paraguay. However, for this research, the goal was to create an equal distribution across
the world, to the extent possible with the existing tools and resources.
The Mapping Protocol : The protocol contains a detailed set of instructions on how to
ﬁnd the assigned settlement, determine boundaries, map the current settlement boundary,
review historical aerial images, and redraw the settlement boundary, recording dates of change
observed. Beginning with the location identiﬁed through search and corroboration processes previously
described, locations were loaded into GEP for close examination of urban form using the satellite
imagery. Speciﬁcally, we examined the density of structures as compared to other parts of the city,
the regularity, or irregularity of the division of space (grid vs. curvilinear, buildings seemingly overlaid
--- page 9 ---
Sustainability 2020 ,12, 9510 9 of 25
vs. those with distinct edges), and materiality (appearance of concrete, steel, glass, and wood vs.
piecemeal materials with less sturdy appearance). The protocol also includes guidance on how to
use the GEP software and InDesign layout to record sources and additional information. In addition,
protocol included modeling of sample areas in SketchUp software of each settlement for area density
comparison; however, that part of the data is not included in this paper. Students were instructed on
the use of the software and advised on ways to ﬁnd more resources to determine the extension and
location of the settlement (for a sample of mapping protocol see Supplemental Material). Since data
sources varied, this entailed one of the most time-consuming parts of the research. Several scholarly
papers refer to informal areas in cities; however, they give little guidance on the location of those areas
of research in the cities.
Direct Mapping: For the actual mapping, a combination of remote sensing in the form of satellite
historical images and direct mapping was selected as the most viable mapping method. Using readily
available satellite photography provided a standard base for each entry. Google Earth Pro (GEP)
provided a widely accessible data set that could be used across cases and did not require the purchase
of mapping software. An ongoing goal of the project is to continue additional mapping to reach other
stakeholders to map additional settlements. Using direct mapping allows us to deﬁne clear limits based
on the nuanced variations in urban form and triangulate information from di erent sources that cannot
automatically be captured by a learning algorithm. For example, this method allows identiﬁcation of
temporary structures that do not represent the expansion of the settlement, di erentiation between city
boundaries and settlement encroachments, and inclusion of areas that have unique morphological
urban development patterns that are not similar to those in informal settlements in other regions,
such as the case of informal areas in Mongolia, whose units of circular shapes di er substantially
from settlements in places such as India. Computer vision can be e ective at identifying di erent
urban forms, and it is advantageous to distinguish formal from non-formal settlements. However,
it is more di cult for that software to determine di erences between similar urban forms, such as
the limits between two adjacent non-mapped informal settlements. To make determinations on these
ambiguities, humans tend to be more proﬁcient; they can interpolate non-geographical resources (such
as reference to an academic paper or a media publication) to make such determinations. The limits of a
neighborhood are not only based on the unique morphological features but also on their history and its
members’ demarcations. For example, in Colombia, the informal settlement of Independencia in on the
city map as a single place; however, it is comprised of three di erent neighborhoods for its residents,
each one with a unique history and particular local governance structure. This social di erence has
determined a di erent morphological evolutionary process for each area [ 10]. This project used the
two sources of the morphological identiﬁcation applying RS and the secondary academic and media
sources to shed light on those features not readily identiﬁable by following only the morphology.
The academic and media sources permit the identiﬁcation of geolocation of settlements, and in some
cases the estimated boundary of the settlements. The morphological exploration looks at homogenous
urban typologies of settlement build texture to determine a more accurate measure of limits [ 83] This
morphological exploration serves to create a baseline measurement to explore changes over time.
We acknowledge that with more technological tools, sta , and budgetary resources, all these issues
could be automated; however, at this stage of the research, we do not have those resources. For this
project, we used manual digitization from high-resolution satellite images, a data methodology used
by other mapping projects [ 94,95] to compensate for the lack of precision found in other remote sensing
tools [63].
The ﬁrst step of the protocol was to ﬁnd the settlement and determine its boundaries (Figure 1).
Determining the limits of an informal settlement is not a precise endeavor [ 96,97]. However,
informal settlements present signiﬁcant morphological di erences, contrasting formal areas that
surround them [ 34,55]. For this project, we determined that in addition to knowing locations,
to distinguish the boundaries of an informal settlement we would use those physical characteristics of
continued urban patterns, unregulated housing distribution, high density, and small (substandard)
--- page 10 ---
Sustainability 2020 ,12, 9510 10 of 25
building sizes. This analysis of spatial patterns using space syntax tools has been used to identify
Favelas in Rio de Janeiro [ 98]. The direct measure is a more labor-intensive process; however, it provides
a more accurate and standardized way to collect the required information. Other forms to determine
the limits are municipal maps, scholarly articles, and web maps. The key was to ﬁnd the boundary
of the settlement at the time of mapping. At this stage, the selected researcher would ﬁnd the exact
location and perimeter of the settlement using GEP and would geolocate the site by drawing its
current boundary, collecting a 4k resolution aerial image of the site as a reference. After identifying
and mapping change for each settlement, we coded surrounding physical features for each entry on
the sample to understand how the physical context inﬂuences how settlements expand. We codiﬁed
physical characteristics that could a ect or impede settlement expansion based on the three physical
variables: surrounding development, topography, and water features. For surrounding development,
we evaluated if the urban form permitted the settlement to expand; for this, we classiﬁed each settlement
as open or closed depending on how the settlement perimeter abutted open land or developed areas.
We used the same procedure for water features, visually verifying using the GEO databases for features
that represented water limits such as oceans, lakes, or rivers. For topography, we used the GEP
database and the World Topographic Map which compiles data from U.S. Geological Survey (USGS),
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), U.S. National Park Service (NPS), Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Department of Natural Resources Canada (NRCAN),
HERE, and Esri. Data for select areas were sourced from OpenStreetMap contributors. The map
provides coverage for the world down to a scale of ~1:72k. Coverage is provided down to ~1:4k for the
following areas: Africa, Australia, and New Zealand; Europe and Russia; India; most of the Middle
East; Paciﬁc Island nations; Alaska; Canada; Mexico; South America and Central America. Coverage is
available down to ~1:2 and ~1:1k in select urban areas. Settlements located in, or adjacent to, areas with
more than 30% slope were classiﬁed as having topographic limitations to development.
Sustainability 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 25 
and perimeter of the settlement using GEP and would geolocate the site by drawing its current 
boundary, collecting a 4k resolution aerial image of the site as a reference. After identifying and mapping change for each settlement, we coded surrounding physical features for each entry on the 
sample to understand how the physical context influences how settlements expand. We codified 
physical characteristics that could affect or impede settlement expansion based on the three physical variables: surrounding development, topogr aphy, and water features. For surrounding 
development, we evaluated if the urban form pe rmitted the settlement to expand; for this, we 
classified each settlement as open or closed depe nding on how the settlement perimeter abutted open 
land or developed areas. We used the same procedure for water features, visually verifying using the GEO databases for features that represented wate r limits such as oceans, lakes, or rivers. For 
topography, we used the GEP database and the World Topographic Map which compiles data from 
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), U.S. Environmenta l Protection Agency (EPA ), U.S. National Park 
Service (NPS), Food and Agriculture Organization  of the United Nations (FAO), Department of 
Natural Resources Canada (NRCAN), HERE, and Esri. Data for select areas were sourced from OpenStreetMap contributors. The map provides cove rage for the world down to a scale of ~1:72k. 
Coverage is provided down to ~1:4k for the following areas: Africa, Australia, and New Zealand; Europe and Russia; India; most of the Middle East ; Pacific Island nations;  Alaska; Canada; Mexico; 
South America and Central America. Coverage is available down to ~1:2 and ~1:1k in select urban 
areas. Settlements located in, or adjacent to, areas wi th more than 30% slope were classified as having 
topographic limitations to development. 
 
Figure 1. Example of the perimeter selection for settlem ent of Sebkha, Nouakchott, Mauritania [99].  
 
The second step of the protocol focused on what  we considered the most salient and unexplored 
feature of informal settlements: their changing nature [8,10,23,100,101]. Studies of multitemporal change to map growth in informal settlements in Kenya used aerial images over multiple years to 
help determine the variation of the urban form [39]. A standard tool to measure urban change is multispectral imagery, used to differentiate built areas from the rest. Vast databases of this information exist for the U.S and Europe, making them a great tool for examining cities in these places with spatial resolutions from 15 to 30-m. However, for the rest of the world, resolution varies to a 
Figure 1. Example of the perimeter selection for settlement of Sebkha, Nouakchott, Mauritania [99].
The second step of the protocol focused on what we considered the most salient and unexplored
feature of informal settlements: their changing nature [ 8,10,23,100,101]. Studies of multitemporal
--- page 11 ---
Sustainability 2020 ,12, 9510 11 of 25
change to map growth in informal settlements in Kenya used aerial images over multiple years to
help determine the variation of the urban form [ 39]. A standard tool to measure urban change is
multispectral imagery, used to di erentiate built areas from the rest. Vast databases of this information
exist for the U.S and Europe, making them a great tool for examining cities in these places with spatial
resolutions from 15 to 30-m. However, for the rest of the world, resolution varies to a scale of a 60-m
resolution, which made this method inaccurate to measure urban change at the neighborhood scale
globally. The Landsat database o ers global coverage, but resolutions are di erent depending on place,
varying from 30 to 60-m resolutions. Other sources such as Sentinel-2 o er better resolution—10 m.
However, this is still considered low for the study of informal settlements when built units can be as
small as 2 m [ 76]. In this case, the mixing method of VHR and LR can provide appropriate results if
used in the context of Machine Learning. A DigitalGlobe 30 cm VHR image o ers an adequate and
accessible form. We chose the GEP database because it had an acceptable resolution, is free to use,
and permitted the easy training of personnel. It allowed us to set up the protocol as a tool that can be
deployed to local communities worldwide in an accessible manner.
For this research, we selected manual digitization. While this method is labor-intensive and
has its limiting factors, the inclusion of a human in the decision making process about the limits of
a settlement permitted inclusion of a case by case evaluation of other variables that were not easily
accessed through RS, such as political delimitation, infrastructure projects impacts, history of the place,
and cultural approaches to urbanization. Particularly since the majority of the sample is located in the
global south, the employment of available multispectral imagery created a low-resolution base map
from which to create a detailed measure of urban change at the neighborhood scale. Figure 2 shows
an example of mapping using this method in the settlement Independencias in Medellin, Colombia,
using LandsatGLS-multispectral from 1990 to 2010 using the setting false-color. According to ArcGIS,
“multispectral Landsat GLS image service [has been] created from the Global Land Survey (GLS) data
from epochs 1975, 1990, 2000, 2005 & 2010. GLS datasets are created by the United States Geological
Survey (USGS) and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), using Landsat images.
This service includes imagery from Landsat 4, Landsat 5 TM and Landsat 7 ETM, at the 30-m resolution
and Landsat MSS at 60-m resolution, bands 5,4,1. It can be used for mapping and change detection of
agriculture, soils, vegetation health, water-land features, and boundary studies” [ 102]. This method
presents a low scale of detail. For this reason, the researchers selected historical aerial images as a way
to consistently determine and measure change. The GEP historical aerial images database compiles
ﬁles from multiple sources. The older the aerial images provide less consistency between the places
and times of recording of the imagery. This inconsistency of base imagery creates di erences when the
delimiting of the perimeter occurs. Since it is not possible to have maps for every year, in this project,
we standardized mapped samples by dividing the area of change between the ﬁrst measure and the
ﬁnal measure of the perimeters by the number of years between measurements. This standardization
method erases the uniqueness of how deceleration or acceleration of the process of urban area change
happens. However, it permits a comparison of mapped areas at the same level. GEP imagery spatial
resolution varies from 6” (15 cm) to 12” (30 cm); the positional accuracy (CE 90) is of less than 1 m
(accuracy will achieve 1-m CE90 in most areas. Accuracy may not meet 1-m CE-90 in areas of signiﬁcant
relief due to Digital Elevation Model-related errors) [103].
--- page 12 ---
Sustainability 2020 ,12, 9510 12 of 25
Sustainability 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 25 
 
 
Figure 2. Medellin LandsatGLS multispectral im agery from1990 to 2010—false-color [102]. 
After mapping all settlements, the research team  performed a review of mapping correctness 
and standardization of the sample. Each entry location was manually reviewed and approved, 
corrected, or deleted from the AoI sample. Mapping  correctness, in this study, was established 
through a peer review process to determine that the place mapped was considered an informal 
settlement and that its limits were accurately draw n .  F o r  d e t e r m i n a t i o n  o f  a r e a  a s  a n  i n f o r m a l  
settlement in any of the accepted definitions, a refe rence to a document affirming such determination 
must be provided. For limits, the student resear cher provided geographical or bibliographical 
evidence that helped to determine an accepted delim itation of project boundary in the current year. 
For historical imagery, four aerial photographs we re used to assess the evolution of area change. 
Then, the oldest image was selected as a starting point, and a new limit was drawn. The peer-review process forces determination of settlement boundaries  to be reviewed by, at a minimum, three people 
before it is included in the AoI. From the origin al 405 entries, 145 were removed during the review 
stage as they did not meet all the requisite criteria, such as evidence of informal settlement determination or agreement of perimeter limits betw een researchers. Selected settlements locations 
and areas first and last mapped extension can be found and explored in the webapp for the AoI: www.atlasofinformality.co m (see Figure 4). 
Figure 2. Medellin LandsatGLS multispectral imagery from1990 to 2010—false-color [102].
The goal of this task was to ﬁnd evidence of growth in the chosen area. Using the time tool in
GEP , the protocol directed student researchers to record perimeter change in each settlement for each
site at four time points across the 20 years of historic imagery available, starting with the ﬁrst available
aerial image and ending with the most updated one. Since urban change is not consistent and marking
perimeters for each year not possible, four inﬂection points were selected per case—four moments in
which the settlement area changed (see Figure 3). For settlements with no variation, a new perimeter
was also drawn as evidence of no change. GEP data vary for each city but high-resolution imagery
is available between 1990 and 2020. Using GEP , available imagery provided a restricted period to
examine the process of growth across the settlements identiﬁed. However, the foundational date in
94% of settlements was prior to the years available in aerial images of GEP databases. This restriction
presented the opportunity to see how mature informal settlements evolve. The ﬁnal step was the
recording and ﬁling of all data gathered in the previous steps alongside measures collected by other
sources. These include year of settlement foundation, area, and any additional images readily available
on the web.
--- page 13 ---
Sustainability 2020 ,12, 9510 13 of 25
Sustainability 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 25 
 
Figure 3. Time change example of the AoI for Sebkha, Nouakchott, Mauritania. Four aerials for the 
same settlement from 2017, 2002, 2008, and 2002 [99].  
 
Figure 4. AoI webapp screenshots panel: ( a) world map with location, panel ( b) zoom to city-scale 
(Lagos, Nigeria), and settlements [99]. 
3. Results 
This research presents the findings of a collect ion of standardized measurements of 260 informal 
settlements in 147 cities, 102 countries, and 5 contin ents across the world. Th e measurements of areas 
over time present evidence of the expansion of in formal settlements (see Figure 5); furthermore, we 
also looked at the way the physical features that surround the informal neighborhoods condition the way they expand over time. Finally, we tried to make sense of what that rate of growth means in the context of city expansion and forecasting the growth of these areas globally. 
Figure 3. Time change example of the AoI for Sebkha, Nouakchott, Mauritania. Four aerials for the
same settlement from 2017, 2002, 2008, and 2002 [99].
After mapping all settlements, the research team performed a review of mapping correctness and
standardization of the sample. Each entry location was manually reviewed and approved, corrected,
or deleted from the AoI sample. Mapping correctness, in this study, was established through a peer
review process to determine that the place mapped was considered an informal settlement and that its
limits were accurately drawn. For determination of area as an informal settlement in any of the accepted
deﬁnitions, a reference to a document a rming such determination must be provided. For limits,
the student researcher provided geographical or bibliographical evidence that helped to determine
an accepted delimitation of project boundary in the current year. For historical imagery, four aerial
photographs were used to assess the evolution of area change. Then, the oldest image was selected
as a starting point, and a new limit was drawn. The peer-review process forces determination of
settlement boundaries to be reviewed by, at a minimum, three people before it is included in the AoI.
From the original 405 entries, 145 were removed during the review stage as they did not meet all the
requisite criteria, such as evidence of informal settlement determination or agreement of perimeter
limits between researchers. Selected settlements locations and areas ﬁrst and last mapped extension
can be found and explored in the webapp for the AoI: www.atlasoﬁnformality.com (see Figure 4).
--- page 14 ---
Sustainability 2020 ,12, 9510 14 of 25
Sustainability 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 25 
 
Figure 3. Time change example of the AoI for Sebkha, Nouakchott, Mauritania. Four aerials for the 
same settlement from 2017, 2002, 2008, and 2002 [99].  
 
Figure 4. AoI webapp screenshots panel: ( a) world map with location, panel ( b) zoom to city-scale 
(Lagos, Nigeria), and settlements [99]. 
3. Results 
This research presents the findings of a collect ion of standardized measurements of 260 informal 
settlements in 147 cities, 102 countries, and 5 contin ents across the world. Th e measurements of areas 
over time present evidence of the expansion of in formal settlements (see Figure 5); furthermore, we 
also looked at the way the physical features that surround the informal neighborhoods condition the way they expand over time. Finally, we tried to make sense of what that rate of growth means in the context of city expansion and forecasting the growth of these areas globally. 
Figure 4. AoI webapp screenshots panel: ( a) world map with location, panel ( b) zoom to city-scale
(Lagos, Nigeria), and settlements [99].
3. Results
This research presents the ﬁndings of a collection of standardized measurements of 260 informal
settlements in 147 cities, 102 countries, and 5 continents across the world. The measurements of areas
over time present evidence of the expansion of informal settlements (see Figure 5); furthermore, we also
looked at the way the physical features that surround the informal neighborhoods condition the way
they expand over time. Finally, we tried to make sense of what that rate of growth means in the context
of city expansion and forecasting the growth of these areas globally.
Sustainability 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 14 of 25 
 
Figure 5. Settlement growth over time: Toujoinine Tr arza, Mauritania, Mokoko Lagos, Nigeria, 
Soweto Johannesburg, South Africa, Isla Trinitaria Guayaquil, Ecuador, Ajuro Libertador Caracas, Venezuela, Mandala, Collique Callao, Peru, Cite Soleil Port au Prince, Haiti [99].
 
3.1. Learning about Informal Settlement Growth 
To understand how areas were changing, we used the AoI measurements to capture their 
current rate of growth. For the estimation of a settl ement area change, we subtracted the area of the 
last year of measure (ALy) from the area of the fi rst year of measure (AFy). A total of 67% of the 
sample expanded, 12% had no change, and the rest decreased in size by 21%. The fact that most of the informal settlements are expanding is the most significant finding of the research. The sample has 
the most representative settlements by city per co untry; being representative implies some level of 
consolidation. Researchers deem informal settlements  in consolidation states (older settlements) as 
changing at a lower rate. Change at the consolidation stage happens in the third dimension (added levels to existing structures) [8]. However, our results challenge this previous understanding. To 
estimate mean percentage growth ( %𝐺𝑦 ) of the sample, we subtracted the area of the first year (AFy) 
from the area of the last year measurement (ALy) an d divided that by the difference between the year 
of first measurement (Fy) and the year of last (Ly) . Then, we estimated the proportional value of the 
growth per year (%Gy) (see Equation (1)). 
Equation (1). Average grow th per year/settlement: 
 
𝐺𝑦 =
஺௅௬ି஺ி௬
௅௬ିி௬     growth per year 
%𝐺𝑦 =ீ௬(ଵ଴଴)
஺௅௬    percentage of growth per year (1) 
N: Cases; 
Ly: Last Year of Measure; Fy: First Year of Measure; A: Area of Settlement 
This gave us an average percentage growth of 9.8% for the sample in area per year. Growth was 
not homogeneous across regions (See Table 2 fo r regions growth averages). We discovered, as 
Figure 5. Settlement growth over time: Toujoinine Trarza, Mauritania, Mokoko Lagos, Nigeria,
Soweto Johannesburg, South Africa, Isla Trinitaria Guayaquil, Ecuador, Ajuro Libertador Caracas,
Venezuela, Mandala, Collique Callao, Peru, Cite Soleil Port au Prince, Haiti [99].
--- page 15 ---
Sustainability 2020 ,12, 9510 15 of 25
3.1. Learning about Informal Settlement Growth
To understand how areas were changing, we used the AoI measurements to capture their current
rate of growth. For the estimation of a settlement area change, we subtracted the area of the last
year of measure ( ALy) from the area of the ﬁrst year of measure ( AFy). A total of 67% of the sample
expanded, 12% had no change, and the rest decreased in size by 21%. The fact that most of the informal
settlements are expanding is the most signiﬁcant ﬁnding of the research. The sample has the most
representative settlements by city per country; being representative implies some level of consolidation.
Researchers deem informal settlements in consolidation states (older settlements) as changing at
a lower rate. Change at the consolidation stage happens in the third dimension (added levels to
existing structures) [ 8]. However, our results challenge this previous understanding. To estimate
mean percentage growth ( %Gy) of the sample, we subtracted the area of the ﬁrst year ( AFy) from the
area of the last year measurement ( ALy) and divided that by the di erence between the year of ﬁrst
measurement ( Fy) and the year of last ( Ly). Then, we estimated the proportional value of the growth
per year (% Gy) (see Equation (1)).
Equation (1). Average growth per year /settlement:
Gy=ALy AFy
Ly Fygrowth per year
%Gy=Gy(100)
ALypercentage of growth per year(1)
N: Cases;
Ly: Last Year of Measure;
Fy: First Year of Measure;
A: Area of Settlement
This gave us an average percentage growth of 9.8% for the sample in area per year. Growth was
not homogeneous across regions (See Table 2 for regions growth averages). We discovered, as expected,
that regions are expanding at di erent rates; informal areas in Africa and Latin America are growing
more rapidly than those in Asia. Since African cities are going through a period of expansion,
ﬁnding high rates of growth in informal settlements there is expected. In contrast, Latin America is
one of the most urbanized areas of the world with informal settlements in the region dating back a
hundred years [ 6]. Accelerated urban growth is not expected in this region. However, the sample
reveals a signiﬁcant number of settlements with exponential growth. Figure 6 shows how the variation
among cases in the sample growth correlates with geographical regions. Africa commands a signiﬁcant
number of entries with growth between 4.84% and 27.93% per year among its regions. Growth in Africa
is followed by Latin America, where most of the growth happens in South America with a 19.36%
rate of growth, on average, in contrast to Central America (including Mexico) and the Caribbean
with moderate growth rates of 0.98% and 1.08%, on average, respectively. Some regions in Asia have
negative growth rates, such as Eastern Asia, with  1.32% rate on average, to a peak of 4.06% in Western
Asia. Asian settlements present the lowest average increase of 2%. For these estimates, we also report
standard deviations (SD), which demonstrate the erratic nature of growth and change in informal
settlements, with much larger numbers than expected for this measure. The variability of growth
is evidenced by the global SD of 49.75, inﬂuenced greatly by an SD of 87.9 for the South American
portion of the sample and an SD of 98.69 for the Northern Africa portion of the sample, along with
other regions of high variability (see Figure 6 and Table 2).
--- page 16 ---
Sustainability 2020 ,12, 9510 16 of 25
Table 2. Atlas of Informality sample distribution.
Region Number Cases Avg % Growth /Year Median Area He Standard Deviation A%G /Y
Eastern Asia 6  1.32% 14.75 2.35
Melanesia 2 1.18% 19.89 0.31
Southeast Asia 18 0.63% 27.49 2.72
Southern Asia 27 2.48% 60.69 2.72
Western Asia 16 4.06% 98.03 7.03
Asia 69 2.00% 44.17 10.38
Eastern Africa 33 4.84% 51.36 8.81
Western Africa 31 5.50% 55.99 16.43
Southern Africa 17 21.76% 181.64 50.30
Middle Africa 11 22.51% 78.01 47.50
Northern Africa 15 27.93% 61.19 98.69
Africa 107 12.46% 85.64 44.92
Eastern Europe 1 0.29% 58.00 N /A
Southern Europe 1 0.98% 150.06 N /A
Europe 2 0.64% 104.03 0.49
Central America 18 0.98% 32.13 2.07
Caribbean 11 1.08% 36.28 2.70
South America 53 19.36% 50.29 87.90
Americas 82 13.03% 74.24 71.42
World 260 9.85% 55.99 49.75
Sustainability 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 25 
expected, that regions are expanding at different ra tes; informal areas in Africa and Latin America 
are growing more rapidly than those in Asia. Since African cities are going through a period of expansion, finding high rates of gr owth in informal settlements there is expected. In contrast, Latin 
America is one of the most urbanized areas of th e world with informal settlements in the region 
dating back a hundred years [6]. Accelerated urban growth is not ex pected in this region. However, 
the sample reveals a significant number of settlem ents with exponential growth. Figure 6 shows how 
the variation among cases in the sample growth correlates with geographical regions. Africa 
commands a significant number of entries with gr owth between 4.84% and 27.93% per year among 
its regions. Growth in Africa is followed by Latin America, where most of the growth happens in South America with a 19.36% rate of growth, on average, in contrast to Central America (including 
Mexico) and the Caribbean with moderate growth rates of 0.98% and 1.08%, on average, respectively. 
Some regions in Asia have negative growth rates, such as Eastern Asia, with −1.32% rate on average, 
to a peak of 4.06% in Western As ia. Asian settlements present the lowest average increase of 2%. For 
these estimates, we also report standard deviatio ns (SD), which demonstrate the erratic nature of 
growth and change in informal settlements, with  much larger numbers than expected for this 
measure. The variability of growth is evidenced by the global SD of 49.75, influenced greatly by an 
SD of 87.9 for the South American portion of the sample and an SD of 98.69 for the Northern Africa 
portion of the sample, along with other regions of high variability (see Figure 6 and Table 2). 
 
Figure 6. Growth percentages in the Atlas of informalit y, UN HABITAT, retrieved from the United 
Nation’s Millennium Development Goals database [104]. 
There are noteworthy differences between the resu lts of the AoI and the UN estimates [105]. In 
particular, the rate of expansion in the AoI is larger than the estimated percentages of slum population changes from the UN. An interesting contradiction between the data of the AoI and the 
data gathered at the regional scale by agencies, su ch as UN Habitat, is that the AoI consistently 
showed informal neighborhood ex pansion, meaning that they cont inued growing. In contrast, the 
aggregated data present the population living in sl ums as reducing as a proportion of the entire 
population. There could be many reasons for this discrepancy, from the detail in measure to the 
limitation of the relatively small number of cases in  the AoI compared to the estimated total globally. 
However, it raises questions abou t the accuracy of these studies and supports the need for further 
systematic measurements of the glob al situation of informality. It is worth mentioning that the United 
Nations does not provide data about informal settlemen ts in the global north. Most IS literature focus 
on informality as phenomena unique to and prevalen t in the Global South. There are a few scholars 
that support the existence of informal settlement in areas of the global north [106]. The lack of studies and data explains the geographic bias of the AoI in its focus on cases in the Global South. However, for the AoI, we found a few instances of informal settlements in the global north (Spain and Japan); 
however, these places do not exist today as such. 
Figure 6. Growth percentages in the Atlas of informality, UN HABITAT, retrieved from the United
Nation’s Millennium Development Goals database [104].
There are noteworthy di erences between the results of the AoI and the UN estimates [ 105].
In particular, the rate of expansion in the AoI is larger than the estimated percentages of slum population
changes from the UN. An interesting contradiction between the data of the AoI and the data gathered
at the regional scale by agencies, such as UN Habitat, is that the AoI consistently showed informal
neighborhood expansion, meaning that they continued growing. In contrast, the aggregated data
present the population living in slums as reducing as a proportion of the entire population. There could
be many reasons for this discrepancy, from the detail in measure to the limitation of the relatively small
number of cases in the AoI compared to the estimated total globally. However, it raises questions about
the accuracy of these studies and supports the need for further systematic measurements of the global
situation of informality. It is worth mentioning that the United Nations does not provide data about
informal settlements in the global north. Most IS literature focus on informality as phenomena unique
to and prevalent in the Global South. There are a few scholars that support the existence of informal
settlement in areas of the global north [ 106]. The lack of studies and data explains the geographic bias
of the AoI in its focus on cases in the Global South. However, for the AoI, we found a few instances of
informal settlements in the global north (Spain and Japan); however, these places do not exist today
as such.
--- page 17 ---
Sustainability 2020 ,12, 9510 17 of 25
3.2. Classifying the Cases by Location and Landscape Features
Informal settlement area measurements over time present the opportunity to identify predictable
patterns of urban growth. We classiﬁed the sample based on the possibilities for physical expansion.
We only focused on physical features. We did not account for legal or political conditions that could
condition growth. There is precedence for the classiﬁcation of informal settlements using physical
features; during the Favela-Bairro urban upgrading project, favelas the Secretaria Municipal de
Habitaç ão (SMH) classiﬁed depending on their geography as littoral, hill, and ﬂat. Urban expansion
depends on the opportunity to extend to abutting areas physically; as such, we classiﬁed cases
depending on their possibility of expanding as opened or closed. An open settlement would be one
with the ability to encroach into an adjacent area. A closed settlement has physical limitations to its
expansion. Open classiﬁcation is indicative of settlements in peri-urban areas abutting open land in
which they could expand. From the sample, a total of 18 settlements are open, with an average growth
of 19.2% compared to a 1.75% growth rate for the 242 closed settlements. Open settlements grow more
than ten times than those that are closed. For example, the settlement of Nuevo Jerusalem in Medellin,
Colombia, in the peri-urban area grew more than 8400% in area from 2005 to 2019.
For closed classiﬁed settlements, we identiﬁed three types of physical obstacles to expansion.
The typologies that inhibit growth are development, topographical changes, and bodies of water.
We deﬁned development as abutting areas that have any human build structures. We identiﬁed
topographical changes as settlements next or in high sloped areas. For bodies of water, we included
all water type barriers including mangroves, rivers, lakes, and oceans. Based on that classiﬁcation,
closed settlements by type grew at rates of 1.72%, 3.77%, and 1.11%, respectively. From the three
inhibitors of growth, bodies of water represent the highest limiting factor. These features are not
mutually exclusive when considering cases surrounded by development and changes in topography;
informal settlements grew at a rate of 4.11%. In contrast, cases surrounded by development and a body
of water only grew at a rate of 1.13%. Informal settlements surrounded by both changes in topography
and bodies of water had the lowest percentage of growth of approximately 0.27%.
The analysis shows how there is a clear advantage for informal settlements to expand if they
are not surrounded by any boundary, but it also illustrates how surrounding development beneﬁts,
with respect to other inhibitors (such as topography or bodies of water), the growth of informal
settlements within a denser context. Water acts as the biggest inhibitor for expansion. Areas with
topographic limitations, such as adjacency to bodies of water, provide more pronounced evidence of
environmental challenges faced by dwellers in informal settlements. In the settlement of Mandala in
Mumbai, India, encroaching into the abutting mangrove grew more than 100% until 2009, when the
settlement lost approximately 50% of its total area due to slum removal. In West Point, Montserrado,
Liberia, for example, ocean erosion is making the settlement lose area towards the west-facing area of
the settlement; however, the east side continues growing encroaching into the protected bay. In Ngueli,
N’Djamena, Chad, the process of growth is not linear; the settlement adds and loses area due to
abutting a river. Ngueli’s boundary changes during di erent seasons. Ngueli continually expands;
however, environmental conditions play a crucial role in its rate of growth. During the rainy season,
the Chari River ﬂow increases and ﬂoods the settlement destroying the most vulnerable housing
units. This case creates evidence of how peripheral urbanization in informal land occupation of
environmental sensitive areas is among the most pressing problems of the Global South [ 107]. In 2012,
the settlement was faced with a ﬂood that removed 25% of its total area. Then, in the following year
again during the dry period, the settlement increased its boundary to expand again by a rate of 6.16%.
Cases such as Mandala, Ngueli, and West Point (see Figure 7) show the nuances of area coverage
change in informal settlements. These cases reveal that at the neighborhood scale, growth is not linear,
settlement resilience determines their capacity to continue growing even during events that erode the
physical form, be these events of human or natural origin. The mapping of perimeter extensions serves
as a tool to create evidence of the challenges and resilience of informal settlements under political
pressures and ever-increasing climate ﬂuctuations.
--- page 18 ---
Sustainability 2020 ,12, 9510 18 of 25
Sustainability 2020 , 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 17 of 25 
The analysis shows how there is a clear advantage for informal settlements to expand if they are 
not surrounded by any boundary, bu t it also illustrates how surrounding development benefits, with 
respect to other inhibitors (such as topography or bo dies of water), the growth of informal settlements 
within a denser context. Water acts as the bigges t inhibitor for expansion. Areas with topographic 
limitations, such as adjacency to bodies of water, provide more pronounced evidence of environmental challenges faced by dwellers in info rmal settlements. In the settlement of Mandala in 
Mumbai, India, encroaching into the abutting mang rove grew more than 100% until 2009, when the 
settlement lost approximately 50% of its total area due to slum removal. In West Point, Montserrado, 
Liberia, for example, ocean erosion is making the settlement lose area towards the west-facing area 
of the settlement; however, the east side continue s growing encroaching into the protected bay. In 
Ngueli, N’Djamena, Chad, the process of growth is not linear; the settlement adds and loses area due 
to abutting a river. Ngueli’s boundary changes during different seasons. Ngueli continually expands; however, environmental conditions play a crucial role in its rate of growth. During the rainy season, the Chari River flow increases and floods the se ttlement destroying the most vulnerable housing 
units. This case creates evidence of how peripheral urbanization in informal land occupation of environmental sensitive areas is among the most pressi ng problems of the Global South [107]. In 2012, 
the settlement was faced with a flood that removed 25% of its total area. Then, in the following year 
again during the dry period, the settlement increased its boundary to expand again by a rate of 6.16%. 
Cases such as Mandala, Ngueli, and West Point (see Figure 7) show the nuances of area coverage change in informal settlements. These cases reveal that at the neighborhood scale, growth is not linear, settlement resilience determines their capaci ty to continue growing even during events that 
erode the physical form, be these events of hu man or natural origin. Th e mapping of perimeter 
extensions serves as a tool to create evidence of the challenges and resilience of informal settlements 
under political pressures and ever-increasing climate fluctuations. 
 
Figure 7. Settlement area variability in the informal settlements for Mandala, Ngueli, and West Point. 
3.3. Making Sense of Growth 
We found that informal settlements continue expa nding at an average rate of 9.85%/year. One 
way to comprehend what this finding means in global terms is to transpose the percentage of growth 
Figure 7. Settlement area variability in the informal settlements for Mandala, Ngueli, and West Point.
3.3. Making Sense of Growth
We found that informal settlements continue expanding at an average rate of 9.85% /year. One way
to comprehend what this ﬁnding means in global terms is to transpose the percentage of growth to
land coverage, mapped to the estimated total global urban coverage. Estimates of the total area of the
built environment in the world vary by order of magnitude: from 276,000 square kilometers (km2) in
Vector Map Level 0 (VMAP0) to 3.532 million square kilometers in the Global Rural-Urban Mapping
Project (GRUMP) [ 108]. The Atlas of Urban Expansion estimates urban clusters associated with large
cities had a total built-up area of some 340,000 square kilometers in the year 2000 [ 109]. How much of
that urban area coverage is informal is up for discussion, but it could be as much as one-third of the
entire urban form if using population as an estimation. The UN estimated the world urban population
to be around 4.2 billion people in 2018 [ 110]. An estimated one-third of that urban population live in an
informal area. In informal settlements, their similar morphology permits density estimation, using the
expected estimation measured in other studies of an average urban density for slums of 60,000 people
per km2 [ 111], then the estimated area for slums in the world would be around 23,333.33 square
kilometers. If we calculate a 9.85% rate of growth annually, then every year, an estimated 2298.33
square kilometers of new informal neighborhoods would have been created out of the expansion of
the existing neighborhoods.
This expansion means that every year an informal city, an informal settlement, larger than Moscow,
Mexico City, or Sao Paolo is created. This annual development of informal cities would be equal to
a city that would rank among the twenty largest urban areas of the world. Many variables are still
unknown in this calculation such as the total area of cities, the real proportion of informal settlements in
such areas, accurate population densities for informal dwellings, and the accurate measure of growth
for all world informal settlements. However, this early estimation of such a large rate of growth brings
to the forefront our relative lack of understanding of informal settlements and an urgency to consider
the growth of informal settlements for the creation of appropriate global urban policy. The calculation
of informality expansion here is similar to the Drake equation for astrobiology, a probabilistic argument
used to estimate the number of active, communicative extraterrestrial civilizations in the Milky Way
--- page 19 ---
Sustainability 2020 ,12, 9510 19 of 25
galaxy [ 112]. Even if some data are still not precise, they aid our understanding of a subject for which
we have little certainty but is of signiﬁcant importance to informing global urban policy. UN-Habitat
presents slums (informal settlements) as “representing one of the most extreme forms of deprivation and
exclusion and remain a critical factor for the persistence of poverty and exclusion in the world” [ 113];
having a more nuanced perspective on how urban expansion of informal settlements is changing can
provide a measure to further understand those critical issues.
4. Discussion
In this article, we present a novel methodology for identifying the presence and growth of informal
settlements across the globe. While individual methods have been previously used by other scholars,
the combination of methods and the process of corroboration and validation of data provides a more
inclusive set of samples for examination. No method is perfect, and this one had its limitations, such as
time, current state of satellite imagery and digitization tools, and variations in interpretation of urban
morphology. To mitigate these opportunities for inaccuracy, we employed a peer-review process along
with veriﬁcation of the existence of settlements through expert documentation.
This research builds on the scholarly work that focuses on uncovering the morphological processes
that comprise informal settlements’ unique urban fabric [ 8,18,60,81]. A contributing ﬁnding to the
current discussion is that of a methodological approach to measure informal settlement expansion.
Much exploration is still needed and a reﬁning of the method that can guarantee an automatization of
adding new cases and maintaining the Atlas of Informality long-term. Future research should focus on
a more detailed measure of the characterizations of such expansion and contraction of urban forms
over time as tools and methods provide greater levels of precision, and the inclusion of systems to
reach larger samples of settlements around the world.
There is much discussion today about the scale of informal settlements around the world and the
need for new strategies to improve the quality of living conditions for the population in those places.
The more accurately we can identify the location and patterns of these settlements, the better-matched
solutions can be, whether in the form of policies, services, or adaptive strategies. One of the obstacles
of researching informal settlements resides in the lack of data about these places. A starting point of
creating more data is the correct identiﬁcation of these informal places. Many studies that only focus
on morphological features overlook the cultural and historical elements that deﬁne these places more
precisely within their context. For example, the limits of a neighborhood are not only based on the
unique morphological features but are also rooted in history and members’ demarcations. In Colombia,
for example, the informal settlement of Independencias is labelled on the city map as a single place;
however, it is comprised of three di erent neighborhoods, each with a unique history and governance
structure that determine variations in morphological evolutionary processes. There remains a gap
in the data and research about what the conditions are and how these places change over time.
Presently, new remote sensing tools are advancing at an accelerated pace and could soon provide a
venue for creating a more robust mapping of the physical condition of informality. However, until that
research arrives, and we map all informal settlements in the world, we are still bound by the data that
have been collectively processed at the national scale or by single cases. While still limited by the
available data, the collection of cases presented in the AoI data set ﬁlls a gap for researchers to ﬁnd
and compare informal urban areas across the world in a more accessible manner. Because of the large
scale of informality, a global mapping of informal settlements is a long-term project. The AoI only
represents a small sample of what is a large phenomenon. However, the main problem presented here
is that of the deﬁnition of informality which incites errors within the national indexes on which SDG
and international agencies base their strategies to solve the world’s most crucial problems continues
to prevail. The direct approach of the AoI permits cross-regional and comparative evaluation of the
phenomena, with the ability to capture various forms of spatial, social, and historical data. It could
also provide an overarching deﬁnition of ‘informal settlement’ drawing on the multiple observations
of hundreds of scholars across our sample and based on urban form and not on the everchanging
--- page 20 ---
Sustainability 2020 ,12, 9510 20 of 25
explanations and expectations of informality. The goal is that these compilations and measures lead
to the production of new intervention tools that go beyond the tested and failed traditional urban
development tools.
In this research, we reveal three critical issues about the changing nature of informal settlements.
First, that the survey of growth corroborates the idea of informality as an expanding geography.
Particularly relevant here is how the estimated rate of growth is more substantial than expected.
While it is expected to see a community’s consolidation and growth stop at some point, this mapping
revealed the contrary: the entire sample continued expanding. The average increase in the sample is
9.85% percent per year. The data revealed signiﬁcant di erences between regions. African regions
continue extending at a high rate, along with South America, as expected. Central America and
the Caribbean, in contrast, show low expansion rates, similar to some areas in Asia. These ﬁndings
highlight a great need for emphasis on the changing nature of these places. This rate of expansion gives
scholars, practitioners, public o cials, and international agencies a sense of urgency regarding the need
to better cope with the challenges that these new cities are confronting. Following traditional measures
on the scale of informality, such as percentages of the population by national indexes, has given us a
sense of relief, but looking at area expansion here has uncovered a less uplifting forecast. The scale of
informal settlement urban expansion requires a thoughtful and continued oversight to understand
the real extent and evolution of living conditions and land use patterns of the global urban poor.
Speciﬁcally, this research highlights the need to incorporate physical area measurement change of
informal settlements as a variable to understand progress on global development goals.
The second ﬁnding of the research is that informal areas in the periphery of cities develop up to
ten times larger than those locked down by development or natural features. Informal settlements
growth in the boundaries of cities raises essential questions about the allocation of urban policy
resources in relationship to where settlements are located. Often considerable city resources are
invested in dealing with informal settlements locked by development in more central areas of cities.
Informal settlements more centrally located are more visible and tend to be located next to high land
value urban areas, which makes them more visible and desirable land for urban renewal. In the best
cases, cities deploy similar resources for all informal areas. However, in light of faster growth in the
traditionally abandoned peri-urban informal settlements, di erent approaches and resources need to
be allocated in cities to informal settlements based on their location and the probability of expansion.
A third point that the mapping of growth reveals is the intersection of non-linear growth
and environmental risk for communities living in informal settlements. A few cases exposed here
demonstrate the resilience challenges these communities su er from as they cope with the destruction
produced by the changing environmental conditions from ﬂoods, ﬁres, and sea-level rise. Given their
precarious positioning within urban areas, these communities are situated to experience intense
impacts from climate change [ 114]. These events create compounding e ects on the urban poor through
destroyed housing, displaced social networks, and endangered lives. However, even when all this
happens, we see the same areas growing back and continuing their expansion process. Cataloging and
detailed study of settlements a ected by environmental risk can not only help to identify problem
areas and direct resources to alleviate those in danger but can also provide data to better understand
how the rest of the urban planet can adapt to the current and future challenges of climate change.
Finally, this research focuses on informal settlements around the world; however, the scale of
informality is intertwined with the future of the planet. In the context of current accelerated global
population growth, it is undeniable that clarity about the path of informal settlements, which account
for the home of more than a third of the population of all cities, provides clarity on the state of global
urbanity. If the forecasting of the proportion of informal settlement dwellers is correct, and by 2050
half of all urban dwellers live in informal settlements, understanding how that change would happen
is essential data to understand not only the challenges of poverty but the challenges of all global
urban dwellers. We need to start investing more in the understanding and overseeing of the spaces of
--- page 21 ---
Sustainability 2020 ,12, 9510 21 of 25
informality not only because the issue is of the utmost importance for billions of poor, but because the
future of the planet depends on it.
Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at http: //www.mdpi.com /2071-1050 /12/22/9510/s1,
SM S1: Mapping protocol. S2: AoI Webapp www.atlasoﬁnformality.com (Figure 4 shows a screen capture of the
AoI webapp).
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, J.S. and J.A.S.; methodology, J.S.; software, J.S. and D.B.; validation,
J.S., J.A.S., and D.B.; formal analysis, J.S.; investigation, J.S., J.A.S., and D.B.; resources, J.S.; data curation, J.S.,
J.A.S., and D.B.; writing—original draft preparation, J.S.; writing—review and editing, J.S. and J.A.S.; visualization,
J.S. and D.H.; supervision, J.S.; project administration, J.S. and J.A.S.; funding acquisition, J.S. All authors have
read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research assistant was funded in part by the Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program
(UROP) at the University of Colorado, Boulder.
Acknowledgments: This work would not have been possible without the collaboration of hundreds of students
from the ENVD 1104 planning class (2017–2018) from the program of Environmental Design at the University of
Colorado Boulder.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. United Nations. Progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals ; United Nations: New York, NY, USA,
2017.
2. United Nations. The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2019 ; United Nations: New York, NY, USA, 2019;
p. 64.
3. Gilbert, A.G. The Latin American City ; Latin America Bureau: London, UK, 1998.
4. Davis, M. Planet of Slums ; Verso: London, UK, 2006; ISBN 1-84467-022-8.
5. Roy, A.; AlSayyad, N. Urban Informality: Transnational Perspectives from the Middle East, Latin America, and South
Asia; Lexington Books: Berkeley, CA, USA, 2004; ISBN 0-7391-0740-2.
6. Perlman, J.E. Favela: Four Decades of Living on the Edge in Rio de Janeiro ; Oxford University Press: Oxford,
UK, 2010.
7. Zamora, H.A. CABA: Cartograf ía de los barrios de Caracas. 1966-2014. VVAA. BAC Bol. Acad. Rev. Investig.
Arquit. Contemp. 2017 ,7, 193–194. [CrossRef]
8. Samper, J. Eroded resilience, Informal settlements predictable urban growth implications for self-governance
in the context of urban violence in Medellin, Colombia. UPLanD J. Urban Plan. Landsc. Environ. Des.
2017 ,2, 183–206.
9. Saunders, D. Arrival City: How the Largest Migration in History is Reshaping Our World ; Vintage: New York,
NY, USA, 2011.
10. Samper, J.J. Physical Space and Its Role in the Production and Reproduction of Violence in the “Slum Wars” in
Medellin, Colombia (1970s-2013s) ; MIT: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2014.
11. UN Habitat. World Cities Report 2016 ; UN Habitat: Nairobi, Kenya, 2016.
12. Mundial, B. World Development Indicators (WDI). 2018. Available online: http: //databank.worldbank.org /
ddp/home.Do (accessed on 13 July 2020).
13. Rambaldi, G.; Kyem, P .A.K.; McCall, M.; Weiner, D. Participatory spatial information management and
communication in developing countries. Electron. J. Inf. Syst. Dev. Ctries. 2006 ,25, 1–9. [CrossRef]
14. Werlin, H. The slum upgrading myth. Urban Stud. 1999 ,36, 1523–1534. [CrossRef]
15. Zetter, R.; De Souza, F.A. Understanding processes of informal housing: Appropriate methodological tools
for a sensitive research area. Int. Plan. Stud. 2000 ,5, 149–164. [CrossRef]
16. Dovey, K. Informalising architecture: The challenge of informal settlements. Archit. Des. 2013 ,83, 82–89.
[CrossRef]
17. Shatkin, G. Planning to forget: Informal settlements as “forgotten places” in globalising metro Manila.
Urban Stud. 2004 ,41, 2469–2484. [CrossRef]
18. Kamalipour, H.; Dovey, K. Mapping the visibility of informal settlements. Habitat Int. 2019 ,85, 63–75.
[CrossRef]
--- page 22 ---
Sustainability 2020 ,12, 9510 22 of 25
19. Subbaraman, R.; O’brien, J.; Shitole, T.; Shitole, S.; Sawant, K.; Bloom, D.E.; Patil-Deshmukh, A. O the map:
The health and social implications of being a non-notiﬁed slum in India. Environ. Urban 2012 ,24, 643–663.
[CrossRef]
20. Samper, J. Urban Upgrading in a Context of Violence: Perceptions of Security and Physical Space in the Case
of the Favela-Bairro in Rio de Janeiro. Int. Relat. Dipl. 2016 ,4, 760–778. [CrossRef]
21. Barros, J.; Sobreira, F. City of Slums: Self-Organisation Across Scales ; University College, London, Centre for
Advanced Spatial Analysis: London, UK, 2002.
22. Leeds, A. The Signiﬁcant Variables Determining the Character of Squatter Settlements ; University of Texas,
Institute of Latin American Studies: Austin, TX, USA, 1971.
23. Fernandes, E. Regularization of Informal Settlements in Latin America ; Lincoln Institute of Land Policy:
Cambridge, MA, USA, 2011.
24. Hansen, K.T.; Vaa, M. Reconsidering Informality: Perspectives from Urban Africa ; Nordic Africa Institute:
Uppsala, Sweden, 2004.
25. Huchzermeyer, M. Unlawful Occupation: Informal Settlements and Urban Policy in South Africa and Brazil ;
Africa World Press: Trenton, NJ, USA, 2004.
26. Mehrotra, R. Kinetic city, issues for urban design in South Asia. In Reclaiming (the Urbanism of) Mumbai.
Explorations in /of Urbanism ; Sun Publishers: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2009; pp. 142–152.
27. Huchzermeyer, M.; Karam, A. Informal Settlements: A Perpetual Challenge? UCT Press: Cape Town,
South Africa, 2006.
28. Arfvidsson, H.; Simon, D.; Oloko, M.; Moodley, N. Engaging with and measuring informality in the proposed
Urban Sustainable Development Goal. Afr. Geogr. Rev. 2017 ,36, 100–114. [CrossRef]
29. Sliuzas, R.; Mboup, G.; de Sherbinin, A. Report of the Expert Group Meeting on Slum Identiﬁcation and Mapping ;
CIESIN: New York, NY, USA, 2008; pp. 1–36.
30. Chien, K. Entrepreneurialising urban informality: Transforming governance of informal settlements in Taipei.
Urban Stud. 2018 ,55, 2886–2902. [CrossRef]
31. Kihato, C.W.; Royston, L.; Raimundo, J.A.; Raimundo, I.M. Multiple land regimes: Rethinking land
governance in Maputo’s Peri-urban spaces. In Proceedings of the Urban Forum; Springer Nature:
Berlin, Germany, 2013; Volume 24, pp. 65–83.
32. Singh, H.H.; Kumra, V .K. Slums: Threat to urban environment. In Geography and environment: Issues and
challenges ; Concept Publishing Company: New Delhi, India, 1986; pp. 113–138.
33. Gilbert, A.; Gugler, J. Cities Poverty and Development: Urbanization in the Third World ; Oxford University Press:
Oxford, UK, 1982.
34. UN-Habitat, U.N.H.S. The State of the World’s Cities 2006 /2007: The Millennium Development Goals and Urban
Sustainability: 30 Years of Shaping the Habitat Agenda ; Routledge: Oxfordshire, UK, 2006; Volume 3.
35. Ballesteros, M.M. Linking Poverty and the Environment: Evidence from Slums in Philippine Cities ;
Philippine Institute for Development Studies Makati City: Makati City, Philippines, 2010.
36. OECD. OECD Glossary of Statistical Terms—Informal Settlements Deﬁnition. Available online: https:
//stats.oecd.org /glossary /detail.asp?ID =1351 (accessed on 30 September 2016).
37. Kibwana, K. Spontaneous settlement and environmental management. In Essays on Land Law: The Reform
Debate in Kenya ; Faculty of Law, University of Nairobi: Nairobi, Kenya, 2000; pp. 105–136.
38. Oxford, D. Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary ; Oxford University Press Oxford: Oxford, UK, 2000.
39. Hurskainen, P .; Pellikka, P . Change detection of informal settlements using multi-temporal aerial
photographs–the case of Voi, SE-Kenya. In Proceedings of the 5th African Association of Remote Sensing of
the Environment conference, Nairobi, Kenya, 5 March 2004. unpaginated CD-ROM.
40. Werthmann, C.; Beardsley, J. Improving Informal Settlements—Ideas from Latin America |David Rockefeller
Center for Latin American Studies. Available online: http: //www.drclas.harvard.edu /brazil /news /designmag
(accessed on 13 August 2012).
41. Taubenböck, H.; Kra , N.J. The physical face of slums: A structural comparison of slums in Mumbai, India,
based on remotely sensed data. J. Hous. Built Environ. 2014 ,29, 15–38. [CrossRef]
42. Kamel, N.; Mukhija, V .; Loukaitou-Sideris, A. Learning from the Margin: Placemaking tactics. In The Informal
American City: Beyond Taco Trucks and Day Labor ; The MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2014; p. 119.
43. UN-Habitat SDG Goal 11 Monitoring Framework |UN-Habitat. Available online: https: //unhabitat.org /sdg-
goal-11-monitoring-framework (accessed on 6 November 2020).
--- page 23 ---
Sustainability 2020 ,12, 9510 23 of 25
44. Patel, A.; Joseph, G.; Shrestha, A.; Foint, Y. Measuring deprivations in the slums of Bangladesh: Implications
for achieving sustainable development goals. Hous. Soc. 2019 ,46, 81–109. [CrossRef]
45. Purwanto, E.; Sugiri, A.; Novian, R. Determined Slum Upgrading: A Challenge to Participatory Planning in
Nanga Bulik, Central Kalimantan, Indonesia. Sustainability 2017 ,9, 1261. [CrossRef]
46. Jones, P . Formalizing the informal: Understanding the position of informal settlements and slums in
sustainable urbanization policies and strategies in Bandung, Indonesia. Sustainability 2017 ,9, 1436. [CrossRef]
47. World Bank. Population Living in Slums (% of Urban Population) ; The World Bank Group: Washington, DC,
USA, 2015.
48. Hofmann, P . Detecting informal settlements from IKONOS image data using methods of object oriented
image analysis-an example from Cape Town (South Africa). In Remote Sensing of Urban Areas /Fernerkundung
in urbanen Räumen ; Jürgens, C., Ed.; DEFiNiENS AG: Munich, Germany, 2001; pp. 41–42.
49. Amado, M.; Poggi, F.; Martins, A.; Vieira, N.; Amado, A.R. Transforming cape vert informal settlements.
Sustainability 2018 ,10, 2571. [CrossRef]
50. UN-Habitat. The Challenge of Slums: Global Report on Human Settlements, 2003 ; Earthscan Publications:
London, UK, 2003.
51. Archer, D.; Luansang, C.; Boonmahathanakorn, S. Facilitating community mapping and planning for citywide
upgrading: The role of community architects. Environ. Urban 2012 ,24, 115–129. [CrossRef]
52. Hasan, A. Orangi Pilot Project: The expansion of work beyond Orangi and the mapping of informal
settlements and infrastructure. Environ. Urban 2006 ,18, 451–480. [CrossRef]
53. Patel, A.; Crooks, A.; Koizumi, N. Simulating Spatio-Temporal Dyanmics of Slum Formation in Ahmedabad,
India. Sixth Urban Res. Knowl. Symp. 2012 ,2012 , 2–27.
54. Hagen, E. Mapping change: Community information empowerment in Kibera (innovations case narrative:
Map Kibera). In Innovations: Technology, Governance, Globalization ; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2011;
pp. 69–94.
55. Kamalipour, H. Forms of Informality and Adaptations in Informal Settlements. ArchNet-IJAR 2016 ,10, 60.
[CrossRef]
56. Angeles, G.; Lance, P .; Barden-O’Fallon, J.; Islam, N.; Mahbub, A.Q.M.; Nazem, N.I. The 2005 census and
mapping of slums in Bangladesh: Design, select results and application. Int. J. Health Geogr. 2009 ,8, 32.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
57. Niebergall, S.; Loew, A.; Mauser, W. Integrative assessment of informal settlements using VHR remote
sensing data—the Delhi case study. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Appl. Earth Obs. Remote Sens. 2008 ,1, 193–205. [CrossRef]
58. Rüther, H.; Martine, H.M.; Mtalo, E.G. Application of snakes and dynamic programming optimisation
technique in modeling of buildings in informal settlement areas. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens.
2002 ,56, 269–282. [CrossRef]
59. Stow, D.; Lopez, A.; Lippitt, C.; Hinton, S.; Weeks, J. Object-based classiﬁcation of residential land use within
Accra, Ghana based on QuickBird satellite data. Int. J. Remote Sens. 2007 ,28, 5167–5173. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
60. Kuer, M.; Barrosb, J. Urban morphology of unplanned settlements: The use of spatial metrics in VHR
remotely sensed images. Procedia Environ. Sci. 2011 ,7, 152–157. [CrossRef]
61. Mayunga, S.D.; Coleman, D.J.; Zhang, Y. A semi-automated approach for extracting buildings from QuickBird
imagery applied to informal settlement mapping. Int. J. Remote Sens. 2007 ,28, 2343–2357. [CrossRef]
62. Huang, J.; Lu, X.X.; Sellers, J.M. A global comparative analysis of urban form: Applying spatial metrics and
remote sensing. Landsc. Urban Plan. 2007 ,82, 184–197. [CrossRef]
63. Kuer, M.; Pfe er, K.; Sliuzas, R. Slums from space—15 years of slum mapping using remote sensing.
Remote Sens. 2016 ,8, 455. [CrossRef]
64. Hofmann, P .; Strobl, J.; Blaschke, T.; Kux, H. Detecting informal settlements from QuickBird data in Rio de
Janeiro using an object based approach. In Object-Based Image Analysis ; Springer: Berlin /Heidelberg, Germany ,
2008; pp. 531–553.
65. Shekhar, S. Detecting slums from Quick Bird data in Pune using an object oriented approach. Int. Arch.
Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2012 ,39, 519–524. [CrossRef]
66. Stasolla, M.; Gamba, P . Spatial indexes for the extraction of formal and informal human settlements from
high-resolution SAR images. IEEE J. Sel. Top. Appl. Earth Obs. Remote Sens. 2008 ,1, 98–106. [CrossRef]
67. Wurm, M.; Taubenböck, H.; Weigand, M.; Schmitt, A. Slum mapping based on multi-scale texture features in
polarimetric SAR data. Remote Sens. Environ. 2017 ,194, 190–204. [CrossRef]
--- page 24 ---
Sustainability 2020 ,12, 9510 24 of 25
68. Davis, D.S. Object-based image analysis: A review of developments and future directions of automated
feature detection in landscape archaeology. Archaeol. Prospect. 2019 ,26, 155–163. [CrossRef]
69. Lasaponara, R.; Masini, N. Satellite Remote Sensing: A New Tool for Archaeology ; Springer Science & Business
Media: Berlin, Germany, 2012; Volume 16.
70. Tarolli, P .; Cao, W.; Soﬁa, G.; Evans, D.; Ellis, E.C. From features to ﬁngerprints: A general diagnostic
framework for anthropogenic geomorphology. Prog. Phys. Geogr. Earth Environ. 2019 ,43, 95–128. [CrossRef]
71. Kennett, D.J.; Kennett, J.P . Early state formation in southern Mesopotamia: Sea levels, shorelines, and climate
change. J. Isl. Coast. Archaeol. 2006 ,1, 67–99. [CrossRef]
72. Guedes, J.A.A.; Crabtree, S.A.; Bocinsky, R.K.; Kohler, T.A. Twenty-ﬁrst century approaches to ancient
problems: Climate and society. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2016 ,113, 14483–14491. [CrossRef]
73. Fallatah, A.; Jones, S.; Mitchell, D.; Kohli, D. Mapping informal settlement indicators using object-oriented
analysis in the Middle East. Int. J. Digit. Earth 2019 ,12, 802–824. [CrossRef]
74. Kuer, M.; Pfe er, K.; Sliuzas, R.; Baud, I. Extraction of slum areas from VHR imagery using GLCM variance.
IEEE J. Sel. Top. Appl. Earth Obs. Remote Sens. 2016 ,9, 1830–1840. [CrossRef]
75. Fallatah, A.; Jones, S.; Mitchell, D. Object-based random forest classiﬁcation for informal settlements
identiﬁcation in the Middle East: Jeddah a case study. Int. J. Remote Sens. 2020 ,41, 4421–4445. [CrossRef]
76. Gram-Hansen, B.J.; Helber, P .; Varatharajan, I.; Azam, F.; Coca-Castro, A.; Kopackova, V .; Bilinski, P .
Mapping informal settlements in developing countries using machine learning and low resolution
multi-spectral data. In Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 2019 AAAI /ACM Conference on AI, Ethics,
and Society, Honolulu, HI, USA, 27–28 January 2019; pp. 361–368.
77. Mboga, N.; Persello, C.; Bergado, J.R.; Stein, A. Detection of informal settlements from VHR satellite images
using convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE international geoscience and remote
sensing symposium (IGARSS), Fort Worth, TX, USA, 23–28 July 2017; pp. 5169–5172.
78. Shabat, A.M.; Tapamo, J.-R. A comparative study of the use of local directional pattern for texture-based
informal settlement classiﬁcation. J. Appl. Res. Technol. 2017 ,15, 250–258. [CrossRef]
79. Gevaert, C.M.; Persello, C.; Sliuzas, R.; Vosselman, G. Informal settlement classiﬁcation using point-cloud
and image-based features from UAV data. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 2017 ,125, 225–236. [CrossRef]
80. Williams, N.; Quincey, D.; Stillwell, J. Automatic classiﬁcation of roof objects from aerial imagery of informal
settlements in Johannesburg. Appl. Spat. Anal. Policy 2016 ,9, 269–281. [CrossRef]
81. Taubenböck, H.; Kra , N.J.; Wurm, M. The morphology of the Arrival City-A global categorization based on
literature surveys and remotely sensed data. Appl. Geogr. 2018 ,92, 150–167. [CrossRef]
82. Barros, J.; Sobreira, F. City of Slums: Self-Organisation Across Scales. UCL Work. Pap. Ser. 2002 ,55, 1–10.
83. Kohli, D.; Sliuzas, R.; Kerle, N.; Stein, A. An ontology of slums for image-based classiﬁcation. Comput. Environ.
Urban Syst. 2012 ,36, 154–163. [CrossRef]
84. Baud, I.; Ku er, M.; Pfe er, K.; Sliuzas, R.; Karuppannan, S. Understanding heterogeneity in metropolitan
India: The added value of remote sensing data for analyzing sub-standard residential areas. Int. J. Appl.
Earth Obs. Geoinform. 2010 ,12, 359–374. [CrossRef]
85. Kamalipour, H. Improvising Places: The Fluidity of Space in Informal Settlements. Sustainability 2020 ,12, 2293.
[CrossRef]
86. Hillier, B.; Greene, M.; Desyllas, J. Correspondence Self-generated Neighbourhoods: The role of urban form
in the consolidation of informal settlements. Urban Des. Int. 2000 ,5, 61–96. [CrossRef]
87. Bhatt, V .; Rybczynski, W. How the other half builds. In Time-saver Standards in Urban Design ; McGraw-Hill:
New York, NY, USA, 2003; Volume 1.
88. Kamalipour, H. Mapping Urban Interfaces: A Typology of Public /Private Interfaces in Informal Settlements.
Spaces Flows An Int. J. Urban Extra Urban Stud. 2017 ,8, 1–12. [CrossRef]
89. Kamalipour, H.; Dovey, K. Incremental Urbanisms ; Mapping Urbanities, Routledge: New York, NY, USA,
2017; pp. 249–268.
90. Ribeiro, G. An ecological approach to the study of urban spaces: The case of a shantytown in Brasilia.
J. Archit. Plan. Res. 1997 ,14, 289–300.
91. Ioannidis, C.; Psaltis, C.; Potsiou, C. Towards a strategy for control of suburban informal buildings through
automatic change detection. Comput. Environ. Urban Syst. 2009 ,33, 64–74. [CrossRef]
92. IPP Data Rio. Available online: https: //www.data.rio /(accessed on 6 November 2020).
93. MTIC Datos Abiertos Colombia. Available online: https: //www.datos.gov .co /(accessed on 6 November 2020).
--- page 25 ---
Sustainability 2020 ,12, 9510 25 of 25
94. Gunter, A.W. Getting it for free: Using Google earthTMand IL WIS to map squatter settlements in
Johannesburg. In Proceedings of the Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, 2009 IEEE International,
IGARSS 2009, Cape Town, South Africa, 12–17 July 2009; Volume 3, pp. III-388–III-391.
95. Joshi, P .; Sen, S.; Hobson, J. Experiences with surveying and mapping Pune and Sangli slums on a geographical
information system (GIS). Environ. Urban. 2002 ,14, 225–240. [CrossRef]
96. Fuchs, M. Slum als Projekt: Dharavi und die Falle der Marginalisierung. Mumbai–Delhi–Kolkata. Annäherungen
Megastädte Indiens ; Draupadi: Heidelberg, Germany, 2006; pp. 47–63.
97. Schubert, D. Der größte Slum Asiens: Dharavi (Mumbai)–Von Fehlschlägen der "Sanierung“ zum Modellprojekt ;
Arbeitskreis Stadterneuerung und Institut für Stadt-und Regionalplanung, Ed.; Megacities und Stadterneuerung,
Jahrbuch Stadterneuerung, Universitätsverlag der TU Berlin: Berlin, Germany , 2009; pp. 99–114.
98. Loureiro, V .; Medeiros, V .; Guerreiro, M.R. Conﬁguration of self-organizing informality: Socio-spatial
dynamic in favelas. In Proceedings of the 11th International Space Syntax Symposium, Instituto Superior
Técnico, Departamento de Engenharia Civil, Arquitetura e Georrecursos, Lisbon, Portugal, 7 July 2017;
pp. 1–17.
99. Samper, J. Atlas of Informality. Available online: www.atlasoﬁnformality.com (accessed on 23 October 2020).
100. Drummond, D. Architectes des Favelas ; Dunod: Paris, France, 1981.
101. Mesa S ánchez, N.E. Proceso de desarrollo de los asentamientos populares no controlados: Estudios de caso
Medell ín, Colombia. Escuela H ábitat 1985 ,12, 1–39.
102. ArcGIS Landsat GLS Multispectral. Available online: https: //www.arcgis.com /home /item.html?id =
472f1e9f630e49ccb88d639543554ef9 (accessed on 27 September 2017).
103. Google What Are the Technical Speciﬁcations for Google Imagery?—Google Maps Data Help. Available online:
https: //support.google.com /mapsdata /answer /6261838?hl =en (accessed on 15 September 2020).
104. UN, D.I.U. Unstats |Millennium Indicators. Available online: http: //mdgs.un.org /unsd /mdg/SeriesDetail.
aspx?srid =710 (accessed on 23 October 2020).
105. UN-HS, U.N.H.S.P . State of the World’s Cities 2010 /2011: Bridging the Urban Divide ; Earthscan: London, UK, 2010.
106. Mukhija, V .; Loukaitou-Sideris, A. The Informal American City: Beyond Taco Trucks and Day Labor ; MIT Press:
Cambridge, MA, USA, 2014.
107. Pimentel Walker, A.P .; Arquero de Alarc ón, M. The competing social and environmental functions of private
urban land: The case of an informal land occupation in S ão Paulo’s south periphery . Sustainability 2018 ,10, 4160.
[CrossRef]
108. Ciesin, I. CIAT Global rural-urban mapping project (GRUMP). In Alpha Version Popul. Grids ; Center for
International Earth Science Information Network: New York, NY, USA, 2004.
109. Blei, A.M.; Angel, S.; Civco, D.L.; Liu, Y.; Zhang, X. Accuracy Assessment and Map Comparisons for Monitoring
Urban Expansion: The Atlas of Urban Expansion and the Global Human Settlement Layer ; Lincoln Institute of Land
Policy: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2018.
110. United Nations. 2018 Revision of World Urbanization Prospects ; United Nations: New York, NY, USA, 2018.
111. Bird, J.; Montebruno, P .; Regan, T. Life in a slum: Understanding living conditions in Nairobi’s slums across
time and space. Oxf. Rev. Econ. Policy 2017 ,33, 496–520. [CrossRef]
112. Burchell, M.J. W (h) ither the Drake equation? Int. J. Astrobiol. 2006 ,5, 243. [CrossRef]
113. UN-Habitat. The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2020. In Indicator 11.1.1: Proportion of Urban
Population Living in Slums, Informal Settlements or Inadequate Housing ; United Nations Human Settlements
Programme (UN-Habitat): New York, NY, USA, 2020.
114. Han, Y.; Song, Y.; Burnette, L.; Lammers, D. Spatiotemporal analysis of the formation of informal settlements
in a metropolitan fringe: Seoul (1950–2015). Sustainability 2017 ,9, 1190. [CrossRef]
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional
aliations.
©2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http: //creativecommons.org /licenses /by/4.0/).
